Handling missing data in ecological research - a response to Popescu et al. 2016


Roxana Tesileanu, Ancuta Cotovelea

Introduction

Wildlife management faces the necessity of integrating more than one aspect. The importance of wildlife management for the society derives mainly from the interaction between humans and wildlife. Without this interaction wildlife management would not exist, as its activities would be covered by other management activities such as nature conservation, leaving the natural trajecotries to take place/deploy without human intervention.  

The existential scope of wildlife management is to face the problems that appear in the wake of human-wildlife interactions. As a more recent example coming from Germany, a coutry known for its ecologically conscient management structures, the single brown bear coming from Trentino/Italy into Bayern/Germany in the summer of 2006, was shoot after two months (I have to check the date) due to its dangerous behaviour. From a strictly conservationist perspective this appears to be as the most unacceptable decision to take. From the perspective of the communities affected, this was a necessary action in order to ensure the safety of their domestic animals.

In the present article we argue that wildlife management is engaged in decion-making processes that should take into account sensible aspects of ecological research, the importance of human-wildlife conflicts and the increased need for recreational activities in nature.           


Sensible aspects of ecological research

One of the greatest pitfalls in ecological research is the presence of missing data. In cases where no information comes along, researchers are tempted to extrapolate beyond the studied area, in order to make predictions. Sometimes these predictions cannot be checked, sometimes they collide with results from other studies. This is also the case of the article written by Popescu et al. 2016. 

Calibration and validation of models should use trusted data. The model should be calibrated for new areas. Factors determining the growth rate should be investigated. 


Everybody wants to take uncertainty into accout, adding thereby new variables, bringing additional information in the analysis.  


The b. bear doesn't disperse on long distances and don't passes through plains. The b. bear habitat in the Romanian mountains is rather isolated from the European b. bear populations. Thus it might be that there is a different subpopulation, with different characteristics, much better adapted at Romanian climatic conditions. 

The b. bear distribution across Europe is not homogenous, climatic conditions and other environmental variables are not homogeneous, the initial densities are not homogeneous, thus extrapolating is heikel. In the case of wolf, this looks much more homogeneous, thus the close estimates between the two growth rates (Popescu and the growth rate based on reported abundances).  

  
